.TH CENTRALLIX 8 "Sept 17, 2010" "Version 0.9.1" "Centrallix Manual"
.SH NAME
centrallix - the Centrallix Application Platform server daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B centrallix
[\-c \fI<config file>\fP] [\-d] [\-h] [\-q] [\-V]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The Centrallix Application Platform is a highly flexible environment
for developing rich internet applications (RIA's).  It features both
data and application abstraction, a SQL engine for joining diverse
data sources, declarative (not scripted) development, reports,
components, and style templates.
.PP
Centrallix's application abstraction means that app developers do not
code to the actual application deployment vehicle (presently RIA's via
HTML/HTTP).  This should allow Centrallix apps to be deployed using
other methods in the future, without requiring changes to the apps
themselves.
.PP
Centrallix's data abstraction means that data can be spread across
diverse data sources and still joined together using Centrallix's
built-in SQL engine, simplifying data integration needs.  It also
means that applications can be agnostic of the database backend that
is in use.  Furthermore, Centrallix apps themselves are written as
structured data, which could potentially be stored in a variety of
formats.
.PP
The system also includes a report writer and formatter, which supports
output in a variety of formats including plain text, PostScript, PDF, CSV
files, PCL, and HTML.
.SH OPTIONS
.l
Command-line options for the centrallix server binary:
.TP 8
.B  \-c \fIconfig file\fP
Specify a configuration file to use.  The default is typically either
/etc/centrallix.conf or /usr/local/etc/centrallix.conf, depending on
how Centrallix was installed.
.TP 8
.B  \-d
Run as a background service: fork and run in the background after
starting up.
.TP 8
.B  \-h
Print command-line options (help).
.TP 8
.B  \-q
Initialize quietly (don't print copyright header and module information).
.TP 8
.B \-V
Print Centrallix version and copyright information.
.SH FILES
.TP 8
.B /etc/centrallix.conf
The main configuration file for Centrallix.  See
.BR centrallix.conf (5)
.TP 8
.B /etc/centrallix/rootnode
The file that roots the Centrallix "ObjectSystem".  This file is an
object, typically of type "system/uxfile", which establishes where
the ObjectSystem "lives".  A typical location is /var/centrallix/os
on managed installs.  It is possible for the ObjectSystem to be
rooted in something other than a directory in the local filesystem,
though that is not typically done at the time of writing of this
document.
.TP 8
.B /etc/centrallix/types.cfg
A hierarchical MIME types definition file for Centrallix.  This file
defines types and file extensions, as well as relationships between
types.
.TP 8
.B /etc/centrallix/useragent.cfg
A definition file for user agents (browsers) that Centrallix's HTML
application generation supports, including lists of capabilities in
each user agent.
.TP 8
.B /usr/lib/libCentrallix.so
A shared library from the centrallix-lib package which contains
foundational functionality for Centrallix, including handling of
strings, arrays, hash tables, string tokenizing, threading, the
security-oriented "quoting printf" module, and more.
.TP 8
.B /usr/lib/libStParse.so
A shared library permitting the parsing of Centrallix "structure
files", without support for full expressions.  This library is used
by some other programs, but not by the Centrallix server binary, as
it has its own copy of the "structure file" parser which has full
expression support.
.TP 8
.B /usr/lib/centrallix/ (directory)
The location of loadable Centrallix modules, typically supplying
additional (optional) data connectivity drivers (objectsystem drivers),
or additional network interfaces other than HTTP.
.TP 8
.B /usr/include/cxlib/ (directory)
The location of centrallix-lib development header files, if installed.
.TP 8
.B /var/centrallix/os/ (directory)
The typical location of the Centrallix objectsystem root (see rootnode,
above).  The ObjectSystem is analogous to a "web root" or "document
root" for web servers.
.SH EXAMPLES
Below is an example /etc/centrallix/rootnode file that is typical of
a Centrallix install:
.RS 4
.nf

$Version=2$
rootnode "system/uxfile"
    {
    // This should point to your ObjectSystem root directory.
    path = "/var/centrallix/os";
    }

.fi
.RE
Here is a very simple Centrallix application, just consisting of a
blank page with a title.  The file might typically be located at:
/var/centrallix/os/hello_world.app
.RS 4
.nf

$Version=2$
hello_world "widget/page"
    {
    // Page title, shows up in browser titlebar
    title = "Hello, World!";

    // Design height and width, needed so that Centrallix can scale
    // the application properly if the user's browser is a different
    // size
    width = 800;
    height = 600;
    }

.fi
.RE
.SH "KNOWN BUGS"
Below are a few known issues with the Centrallix platform.
.IP 1.
The policy-based security subsystem (CXSS) is, at present, mostly absent.  This
means that, among other things, there is insufficient control on what
"senses" a user can use to open an object.  For instance, without
the security subsystem, filesystem-level permissions are insufficient
to make a distinction between a user modifying a CSV file as a whole
and that user modifying a field in a record in the CSV file (the former
would typically require a higher security clearance, whereas the latter
ensures the user doesn't damage the structure of the CSV file).
.IP 2.
The multithreading model currently used by Centrallix is non-preemptive.  This
means that, depending on the flexibility of the underlying library,
calls to external services (such as a database server) may block the
entire Centrallix process, giving rise to the potential for application
level deadlocks or denial of service situations.
.IP 3.
We are aware of some memory/resource leaks in the Centrallix codebase.
.IP 4.
Centrallix does not yet support SSL/TLS.  This means that connections to
a Centrallix server over an untrusted network (e.g., the Internet) could
allow logon credentials to be exposed.  If you require access across an
untrusted network (such as the Internet), use software such as a VPN, SSH
port forwarding, SSL tunneling (stunnel), or front the server with Apache
using mod_ssl and set up as a reverse proxy.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
E-mail bug reports to:  centrallix-devel at lists.sourceforge.net

If initial confidentiality is desired, sensitive security issues can
be sent directly to the primary maintainer of Centrallix at:
Greg.Beeley at LightSys.org
.SH AUTHORS
Greg Beeley, Josiah Ritchie, and other Centrallix developers.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2010 LightSys Technology Services, Inc.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR test_obj (1),
.BR centrallix.conf (5)
