.TH TEST_OBJ 1 "Sept 17, 2010" "Version 0.9.1" "Centrallix Manual"
.SH NAME
test_obj - command-line version of Centrallix for testing purposes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B test_obj
[\-c \fI<configfile>\fP] [\-C \fI<command>\fP] [\-f \fI<cmdfile>\fP]
[\-h] [\-o \fI<outputfile>\fP] [\-p \fI<password>\fP] [\-q]
[\-u \fI<username>\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The
.B test_obj
program provides a command-line interface to the Centrallix OSML
API (the ObjectSystem), and is a convenient way to test ObjectSystem
drivers under development, run a quick SQL query, or run off a report
without having to launch the full Centrallix server process.

When invoked, test_obj asks the user for login credentials in order to
set up the user's session.  It then presents the user with an OSML
(ObjectSystem Management Layer) prompt, at which several commands are
available for manipulating the ObjectSystem and its data.
.SH OPTIONS
.l
Command-line options for the centrallix server binary:
.TP 8
.B  "\-c \fIconfigfile\fP"
Specify a configuration file to use.  The default is typically either
/etc/centrallix.conf or /usr/local/etc/centrallix.conf, depending on
how Centrallix was installed.
.TP 8
.B "\-C \fIcommand\fP"
The -C option provides test_obj with a single command to run, after
which it will exit.  See COMMANDS, below.
.TP 8
.B "\-f \fIcmdfile\fP"
Tells test_obj to, rather than prompting from standard input, read
a series of commands from the file \fIcmdfile\fP.  Lines that are
blank or which begin with a # (comment) symbol are ignored.
.TP 8
.B  \-h
Print command-line options (help).
.TP 8
.B "\-o \fIoutputfile\fP"
Specify a file in which to place output from the commands.  The output
can also be specified via the 'output' command.  See COMMANDS.
.TP 8
.B "\-p \fIpassword\fP"
Specify a login password to use.  If not specified, test_obj will prompt
for the password (reminder: specifying the password on the command line
can be dangerous; other users can observe the password by using the "ps"
command).
.TP 8
.B  \-q
Initialize quietly (don't print copyright header and module information).
.TP 8
.B "\-u \fIusername\fP"
Specify a login username to use.  If not specified, test_obj will prompt
for the username.
.SH FILES
(Also see the manual page for
.BR centrallix (8)
for more files and directories used by centrallix and test_obj)
.TP 8
.B /etc/centrallix.conf
The main configuration file for Centrallix.  See
.BR centrallix.conf (5)
.TP 8
.B "~/.cxhistory"
The test_obj program supports command-line history at the OSML: prompt,
and that command line history is stored in the .cxhistory file in the 
user's home directory for future reference the next time test_obj is
used.
.SH COMMANDS
When run, the test_obj command will present the user with an OSML:/>
prompt, indicating the "current working directory" within the Centrallix
ObjectSystem.  The following commands are supported:
.TP 8
.B annot /path/to/object
Add or change the annotation on an object. An annotation is a standard property that all objects have which is used to briefly describe the object.
.TP 8
.B cd /path/to/new/working/directory
Change the current working directory in the OSML.
.TP 8
.B copy { srctype | dsttype } /src/object /dest/object
Copy one object's content to another.  The copy can be done with the type
of the source (srctype) or the type of the destination (dsttype).  For
instance, when running a report, 'dsttype' can be useful since it causes
Centrallix to look at the type of the destination (e.g., via its filename
extension, such as .pdf), and use that type when opening the source so
that the report generates PDF output.
.TP 8
.B create /new/object/path
Create a new object.  During creation, the user will be prompted for a set
of initial attribute/value pairs for the object.

If objectpath is "*", then the OSML will automatically name the object if
it is appropriate for that to be done (for database table row objects, this
means generating an automatic primary key value).
.TP 8
.B csv {sql-query}
Run a SQL query and print the results in CSV format. Useful when exporting
data or running a test suite item, especially in combination with the 'output'
command. This is most useful when all objects in the query result set have
the same set of attributes.
.TP 8
.B delete /path/to/object
Delete an object.
.TP 8
.B exec /path/to/object {methodname} {parameter}
Call a method on an object.
.TP 8
.B hints {objectpath} {attribute}
Display presentation hints of a particular attribute on an object.
Presentation hints include various types of data integrity and display
rules, such as the maximum number of characters allowed in a string attribute,
whether an attribute can be NULL, the default value for an attribute, and
much more.
.TP 8
.B help
Display a list of commands.
.TP 8
.B ls /path/to/object | list /path/to/object
List the objects in the current directory in the objectsystem, or if an objectpath is supplied, list the objects within that object.
.TP 8
.B output {local-filename}
Change where command output is sent. This command takes a filename, not an objectpath, as output is saved into the local filesystem, not into the OSML. This command will override any "-o" option passed to test_obj. If no filename is supplied, output reverts to standard output.
.TP 8
.B print /path/to/object
Display an object's content.
.TP 8
.B query {sql-query}
Run a SQL query, displaying every attribute from every object in the query result set on a separate line.
.TP 8
.B quit
Exit from test_obj.
.TP 8
.B show /path/to/object
Display an object's attributes and methods, as well as presentation hints where applicable and object flags.
.SH EXAMPLES
Below is an example run of test_obj:
.RS 4
.nf

linux# test_obj 

Centrallix/0.9.1 build #1358-1 [DEVELOPMENT]

Copyright (C) 1998-2010 LightSys Technology Services, Inc.
An open source community developed project.  Provided with
ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.  See the file 'COPYING' for details.

mod: osdriver mysd (MySQL ObjectSystem Driver, 0.1.0)
mod: osdriver sybd (Sybase ObjectSystem Driver, 0.9.0)
mod: osdriver xml (XML ObjectSystem Driver, 0.0.1)

Username: gbeeley
Password: 
OSML:/> csv select :name, :size from subtree /samples where right(:name,4) = ".app"
"name","size"
"basicform.app",8177
"radiobutton.app",504
"ors.app",12464
"timer_test.app",1254
"image_test.app",224
"xml_test.app",2877
"editbox_test2.app",862
"dropdown.app",883
"pane_test.app",649
"repeat_test.app",660
"objcanvas_test.app",4343
"textbutton_test.app",2428
"datetime.app",302
"terminal.app",359
"button_test.app",1016
"textarea.app",376
"checkbox.app",625
"FourTabs.app",2903
"fade_test.app",1174
"clock.app",676
"labeled_editbox_test.app",1298
"index.app",2137
"component_test.app",2712
"osrc_rule_filter.app",759
"Months.app",1903
"simplerpt.app",875
"scrollbar_test.app",1850
"generic_form_test.app",1500
"menu.app",2062
"basicform2.app",8712
"window_test.app",2013
"window.app",468
OSML:/> quit

.fi
.RE
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
E-mail bug reports to:  centrallix-devel at lists.sourceforge.net

If initial confidentiality is desired, sensitive security issues can
be sent directly to the primary maintainer of Centrallix at:
Greg.Beeley at LightSys.org
.SH AUTHORS
Greg Beeley, Josiah Ritchie, and other Centrallix developers.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 1998-2010 LightSys Technology Services, Inc.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR centrallix (8),
.BR centrallix.conf (5)
