# Doc Reports Guide

Author: Israel Fuller

Date: May 05, 2026

License: Copyright (C) 2026 LightSys Technology Services.  See LICENSE.txt.

## Table of Contents
- [Doc Reports Guide](#doc-reports-guide)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Using Doc Reports](#using-doc-reports)
    - [Generating Reports](#generating-reports)
    - [Customizing Reports](#customizing-reports)
    - [Links and Line Numbers](#links-and-line-numbers)
    - [Confidence](#confidence)
    - [Child Widgets](#child-widgets)
  - [Reading Doc Reports](#reading-doc-reports)
    - [Widget Stats](#widget-stats)
    - [Missing Widget Docs](#missing-widget-docs)
    - [Stale Widgets Docs](#stale-widgets-docs)
    - [Widget Errors](#widget-errors)
  - [Script Design](#script-design)

## Using Doc Reports
Documentation reports (or doc reports, for short) are generated files that show discrepancies between [widgets.xml](../widgets.xml) where widgets are documented and the real widget implementations in files like `wgtdrv_*.c`, `htdrv_*.c`, and `htdrv_*.js`.  Generating these reports uses various xml and regex-based parsing techniques to detect widget documentations and implementations.

### Generating Reports
Reports can be generated by running `make doc-report` in the `centrallix-doc/Widgets` directory.

If you see python errors, check that `python3 --version` is at least `3.11`. Preferably, the version should be at least `3.12`; the version on which the script was written and tested, but `3.11` *should* also work. If you need to change your python version, you can use the command below to list all available python installations on your machine.

```sh
compgen -ac | grep -i python | sort -u
```

### Customizing Reports
To generate reports, the `makefile` runs a python script at `centrallix-doc/Widgets/doc-report/generate.py` which includes a few configuration variables near the top of the file. These variables customize how the script runs, including which widgets should be ignored, what widget name aliases exist, etc. Specific information is given in the python file to avoid information duplication.

The regexes used in parsing can also be edited in the section just below the configuration variables.

### Links and Line Numbers
When detecting issues, the script attempts to provide link(s) to relevant file locations.  For example, if an event is undocumented, the script will attempt to include a link to the location where the event was registered.  This process is pretty good and line numbers usually link near the source of the issue, however, this may sometimes fail if code or docs are written in unexpected ways.

### Confidence
Issues detected in the report typically include a confidence score.  This is usually either `confirmed`, `strong`, or `heuristic`, with `confirmed` being the most confident and `heuristic` being the least.  These values are estimates, at best, based on the estimated accuracy of the various detection methods in use.  Thus, confidence should be taken with a grain of salt, although it still provides useful insight when troubleshooting documentation issues.

### Child Widgets
In the `htdrv_*.c` files, there isn't a reliable way to detect which registered widget is the parent and which widgets are children.  For example, see the abridged code example below that registers the tab widget driver and its tabpage child widget.
```c
pHtDriver drv;

drv = htrAllocDriver();
if (drv == NULL) return -1;
strcpy(drv->Name, "DHTML Tab Control Driver");
strcpy(drv->WidgetName, "tab");
drv->Render = httabRender;
htrRegisterDriver(drv);

drv = htrAllocDriver();
if (drv == NULL) return -1;
strcpy(drv->Name, "DHTML Tab Page Driver");
strcpy(drv->WidgetName, "tabpage");
drv->Render = httabRender_page;
htrRegisterDriver(drv);
```
Due to this ambiguity, the doc report **assumes the first widget in an `htdrv_*.c` file is the parent** and all widget declared afterword are children.  As of the time of this writing (May 12th, 2026), this assumption is true for all the implemented widgets.


## Reading Doc Reports
The generation script generates two files: `report.json` and `report.md`, which have different intended uses.
- `report.json` is intended to be read by programs and LLMs.
- `report.md` is intended to be read by humans, so it is this file's focus.

The `report.md` uses a couple general sections.

### Widget Stats
The widget stats section of `report.md` gives general statistics about the detected issues, such as how many widgets are undocumented or obsolete.

### Missing Widget Docs
The missing widget docs section lists all widgets that are implemented in some way, but are completely missing from the docs. This may include child widgets, so remember to check the source links to understand what was detected.

### Stale Widgets Docs
The stale widget docs section lists all widgets that are documented in some way, but that do not appear to be implemented. This may include child widgets (especially if a widget in `widgets.xml` specifies an unexpected child widget type), so remember to check the source links to understand what was detected.

### Widget Errors
The widget errors section lists all widgets that appear to be documented incorrectly.  Possible widget doc errors include:
- **Undocumented events/actions**: An event or action implementation is detected in the code, but not in the docs.
- **Stale events/actions**: An event or action was detected in the docs, but no implementation was detected in the code.
- **Incorrect action parameter docs**: Heuristics detected action parameters being used in the code that were not documented, or failed to detect documented action parameters being accessed in the code.


## Script Design
The original script was written by Cursor across 4 commits, although every line of code in `generate.py` has been edited since then, as the code benefited from extensive clean up and refactoring.  The current design generally follows these steps to create a report:
- **Step 1**: Parse `widgets.xml` (using regexes & `ElementTree`).
  - Parse XML content using Python's builtin `ElementTree` library.
  - Extract line numbers using manual regex parsing.
    - I wish ElementTree provided line numbers, but it doesn't, and this is simpler than adding a dependency for a library that does support line numbers.
- **Step 2**: Parse Implementations (using regexes).
  - Parse C registrations in `wgtdrv_*.c` files.
    - Search for `wgtrAddType()` calls to capture the widget name.
  - Parse C HTML generation in `htdrv_*.c` files.
    - Search for `strcpy(<symbol>->WidgetName, <name>)` calls to capture registered widget names.
      - The first widget is assumed to be the parent, following widgets are assumed to be children.
    - Search for `htrAddEvent(<symbol>, <name>)` calls to capture registered event names.
    - Search for `htrAddAction(<symbol>, <name>)` calls to capture registered action names.
  - Parse JS implementations in `htdrv_*.js` files.
    - Search for `ifcProbAdd()` calls using `ifEvent` or `ifAction` and capture the probe variable name.
    - Search for `.Add()` calls on probe variables to capture event and action names (and action implementation function names).
    - Parse action implementation functions (from `.Add()` calls) to find accesses for the param variable (the first variable).
      - Supports functions that take a param variable with a name (e.g. `function action(aparam)`) and access properties on it (e.g. `aparam.Value`).
      - Supports functions that deconstruct params immediately (e.g. `function action({ Value })`).
      - Searches in comments to allow graceful handling when param variable are passed to other functions.
  - Expand child coverage to handle any-type children.
- **Step 3**: Generate report (JSON).
  - Analyze collected lists of documented and implemented widgets, properties, events, actions, and children to detect differences.
  - Stores differences in a Report data type, containing various JSON-like subtypes (using `TypedDict`).
- **Step 4**: Write reports.
  - Writing `doc-report.json` is easy since the data structure is already in a JSON-like format.
  - To write `doc-report.md`, the code iterates over the internal JSON and writes human-readable markdown content from that data.
