------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Centrallix Core README File
                               June 13th, 2024
                 Greg Beeley (GRB), Greg.Beeley@LightSys.org
              (c) 2001-2024 LightSys Technology Services, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------


OVERVIEW....

Thank you for downloading Centrallix 0.9.1!

Centrallix is Different Than What You Think. :)  This application platform
takes a very different kind of approach to things, in order to achieve its
goals as a platform for community-built applications.  You'll need to forgive
us, because we haven't yet mastered the art of truly communicating what makes
Centrallix unique and gives it a lot of potential... :)

This is the main README file for Centrallix, an application platform server
featuring data abstraction, structural embedding, an AJAX-style web interface,
a builtin SQL engine, and declarative rule and object based development.  The
purpose of Centrallix is to be an application platform for community-developed
business applications, and is particularly designed for situations where an
open-source development model is desired which actually empowers rather than
creating business applications which are so complex that they can't be
realistically and successfully customized by the end-user organization.

If you are reading this file, you have downloaded the Centrallix source code.
Please note that unless this source code came packaged in an RPM or other
installable package format, it is likely an unstable source release.  In this
case, expect parts of the system to not work correctly.

There is also another README file in centrallix-doc.

The main operating system platform for Centrallix is Linux.  However, we have
successfully compiled and run the server on Windows (via cygwin) and Mac OS X
as well.


LICENSING....

Centrallix is utterly and truly Free Open Source Software.

The core of Centrallix is distributed under the GNU General Public License,
version 2 (or any later version published by the free software foundation).
See the included files "LICENSE" and "COPYING" for the details of the license.

Please note that the centrallix-lib package is distributed under a different
license (the LGPL v2.1).

Also please note that the samples in the centrallix-os package are distributed
under a BSD type of license.  This is done so that companies wishing to build
proprietary applications using Centrallix can do so without needing special
permission from Centrallix's copyright holder(s).  Furthermore, the "sys"
directory and its contents, including images and javascript library routines,
are distributed under the LGPL license.


COMPILING....

Unless you are a developer, you probably should not be compiling Centrallix
from its sources, but rather use the installable RPM format instead.  It is
much easier that way.  However, developer or not, if you want to compile the
system from its sources, here are instructions on how to do so.

    1.  Make sure you have downloaded the "centrallix" and "centrallix-lib"
        sources.  Build the centrallix-lib sources first, and that will
	generate both the shared object format (.so) and the static library
	format (.a) binaries.  See the README file with centrallix-lib for
	information on building those libraries.

    2.  Install the centrallix-lib libraries in /usr/lib or /usr/local/lib,
        and make sure those locations are in your LD_LIBRARY_PATH, or else in
	your /etc/ld.so.conf.

    3.  Type "./configure" and then "make install" at the command line, and
	the server should be built.

    4.  Install the centrallix binary in /usr/bin or /usr/local/bin, as your
        system's configuration dictates.  The ./configure script has an
	option called "--prefix" which can be set to /usr/local if you desire
	to install Centrallix in that directory tree.

See the documentation site,

    http://www.centrallix.net/docs/docs.php

for detailed information on compiling Centrallix from source.


GETTING STARTED....

Once you have compiled centrallix, you need to install a base ObjectSystem
package in order for the server to work properly.  Download the centrallix-os
module and install it, perhaps in /var/centrallix/os.  It contains the needed
JavaScript libraries, images, and components used by applications.

Edit your "rootnode" file (usually in /etc/centrallix/) and set it to point
to the directory where you installed centrallix-os, such as /var/centrallix/os.


QUESTIONS?

The open source Centrallix development effort has several places where you
can find answers to questions you have about the system.

First, there are two documentation packages.  The first, "centrallix-doc",
contains documents on using Centrallix as a development environment.  The
second, "centrallix-sysdoc" is a package for those who wish to develop the
Centrallix system itself.

Second, there are three mailing lists.  See http://centrallix.sourceforge.net
for subscription information.  The first, centrallix-announce, is a moderated
list which generally does not permit posting by its subscribers, and is thus
used mainly for release and security announcements regarding Centrallix.  The
second list, centrallix-users, is a great place to ask general usage
questions about the system as well as correspond with others about building
applications on top of the Centrallix development environment.  Finally, a
centrallix-devel list exists for those interested in expanding/revamping/
building Centrallix itself.

Third, there is our documentation site, which provides more information on
installing and configuring this software, as well as information on how to
write applications that run on Centrallix.  See:

    http://www.centrallix.net/docs/docs.php

